Marie Curie

Marie Skłodowska Curie (7 November 1867 - 4 July 1934; born Maria Salomea Skłodowska) 
was a Polish and naturalized-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering 
research on radioactivity. She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first 
person and only woman to win twice, the only person to win a Nobel Prize in two 
different sciences, and was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes. 
She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris, and 
in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris.

Maria Skłodowska was born in Warsaw, in the Russian partition of Poland, on 7 November 
1867, the fifth and youngest child of well-known teachers Bronisława, "née" Boguska, 
and Władysław Skłodowski. The elder siblings of Maria (nicknamed "Mania") were Zofia 
(born 1862, nicknamed "Zosia"), (born 1863, nicknamed "Józio"), Bronisława (born 1865, 
nicknamed "Bronia") and (born 1866, nicknamed "Hela"). On both the paternal and maternal 
sides, the family had lost their property and fortunes through patriotic involvements in 
Polish national uprisings aimed at restoring Poland's independence (the most recent had 
been the January Uprising of 1863–65). This condemned the subsequent generation, including 
Maria, her elder sisters and her brother, to a difficult struggle to get ahead in life.

Maria's paternal grandfather had been a respected teacher in Lublin, where he taught the 
young Bolesław Prus, who would become a leading figure in Polish literature. Her father, 
Władysław Skłodowski, taught mathematics and physics, subjects that Maria was to pursue, 
and was also director of two Warsaw "gymnasia" for boys. After Russian authorities eliminated 
laboratory instruction from the Polish schools, he brought much of the laboratory equipment 
home, and instructed his children in its use.

The father was eventually fired by his Russian supervisors for pro-Polish sentiments, and 
forced to take lower-paying posts; the family also lost money on a bad investment, and 
eventually chose to supplement their income by lodging boys in the house. Maria's mother 
Bronisława operated a prestigious Warsaw boarding school for girls; she resigned from the 
position after Maria was born. She died of tuberculosis in May 1878, when Maria was ten 
years old. Less than three years earlier, Maria's oldest sibling, Zofia, had died of typhus 
contracted from a boarder. Maria's father was an atheist; her mother a devout Catholic. 
The deaths of Maria's mother and sister caused her to give up Catholicism and become agnostic.

When she was ten years old, Maria began attending the boarding school of J. Sikorska; next 
she attended a "gymnasium" for girls, from which she graduated on 12 June 1883 with a gold 
medal. After a collapse, possibly due to depression, she spent the following year in the 
countryside with relatives of her father, and the next year with her father in Warsaw, where 
she did some tutoring. Unable to enroll in a regular institution of higher education because 
she was a woman, she and her sister Bronisława became involved with the clandestine Flying 
University (sometimes translated as "Floating University"), a Polish patriotic institution 
of higher learning that admitted women students.

Maria made an agreement with her sister, Bronisława, that she would give her financial 
assistance during Bronisława's medical studies in Paris, in exchange for similar assistance 
two years later. In connection with this, Maria took a position as governess: first as a home 
tutor in Warsaw; then for two years as a governess in Szczuki with a landed family, the 
Żorawskis, who were relatives of her father. While working for the latter family, she fell 
in love with their son, Kazimierz Żorawski, a future eminent mathematician. His parents 
rejected the idea of his marrying the penniless relative, and Kazimierz was unable to oppose 
them. Maria's loss of the relationship with Żorawski was tragic for both. He soon earned a 
doctorate and pursued an academic career as a mathematician, becoming a professor and rector 
of Kraków University. Still, as an old man and a mathematics professor at the Warsaw Polytechnic, 
he would sit contemplatively before the statue of Maria Skłodowska which had been erected in 
1935 before the Radium Institute that she had founded in 1932.

At the beginning of 1890, Bronisława — who a few months earlier had married Kazimierz Dłuski, 
a Polish physician and social and political activist — invited Maria to join them in Paris. 
Maria declined because she could not afford the university tuition; it would take her a year 
and a half longer to gather the necessary funds. She was helped by her father, who was able 
to secure a more lucrative position again. All that time she continued to educate herself, 
reading books, exchanging letters, and being tutored herself. In early 1889 she returned home 
to her father in Warsaw. She continued working as a governess, and remained there till late 
1891. She tutored, studied at the Flying University, and began her practical scientific 
training (1890–91) in a chemical laboratory at the Museum of Industry and Agriculture at 
"Krakowskie Przedmieście 66", near Warsaw's Old Town. The laboratory was run by her cousin 
Józef Boguski, who had been an assistant in Saint Petersburg to the Russian chemist Dmitri 
Mendeleev.

In late 1891, she left Poland for France. In Paris, Maria (or Marie, as she would be known 
in France) briefly found shelter with her sister and brother-in-law before renting a garret 
closer to the university, in the Latin Quarter, and proceeding with her studies of physics, 
chemistry, and mathematics at the University of Paris, where she enrolled in late 1891. She 
subsisted on her meager resources, suffering from cold winters and occasionally fainting 
from hunger.

Skłodowska studied during the day and tutored evenings, barely earning her keep. In 1893, she 
was awarded a degree in physics and began work in an industrial laboratory of Professor Gabriel 
Lippmann. Meanwhile, she continued studying at the University of Paris, and with the aid of a 
fellowship she was able to earn a second degree in 1894.

Marie had begun her scientific career in Paris with an investigation of the magnetic properties 
of various steels, commissioned by the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry ("Société 
d'encouragement pour l'industrie nationale" ). That same year Pierre Curie entered her life; it 
was their mutual interest in natural sciences that drew them together. Pierre was an instructor 
at the School of Physics and Chemistry, the "École supérieure de physique et de chimie 
industrielles de la ville de Paris" (ESPCI). They were introduced by the Polish physicist, 
Professor Józef Wierusz-Kowalski, who had learned that Marie was looking for a larger laboratory 
space, something that Wierusz-Kowalski thought Pierre had access to. Though Pierre did not have 
a large laboratory, he was able to find some space for Marie where she was able to begin work.

Their mutual passion for science brought them increasingly closer, and they began to develop feelings 
for one another. Eventually Pierre proposed marriage, but at first Marie did not accept as she was 
still planning to go back to her native country. Pierre, however, declared that he was ready to move 
with her to Poland, even if it meant being reduced to teaching French. Meanwhile, for the 1894 summer 
break, Marie returned to Warsaw, where she visited her family. She was still laboring under the illusion 
that she would be able to work in her chosen field in Poland, but she was denied a place at Kraków 
University because she was a woman. A letter from Pierre convinced her to return to Paris to pursue a 
Ph.D. At Marie's insistence, Pierre had written up his research on magnetism and received his own 
doctorate in March 1895; he was also promoted to professor at the School. A contemporary quip would call 
Marie, "Pierre's biggest discovery." On 26 July 1895 they were married in Sceaux (Seine); neither wanted 
a religious service. Marie's dark blue outfit, worn instead of a bridal gown, would serve her for many 
years as a laboratory outfit. They shared two pastimes: long bicycle trips, and journeys abroad, which 
brought them even closer. In Pierre, Marie had found a new love, a partner, and a scientific collaborator 
on whom she could depend. [...]

